If you do BJJ or submission grappling then you should have some ways to get the fight to the ground. Yes, pulling guard is an option in sport BJJ competition, but ultimately this is a martial art, which means we have to at least occasionally consider the self defense aspects of what we’re doing.
Are you going to pull guard in a streetfight? Not bloody likely.
In this Grapplearts article you’re going to learn about the top ten throws and takedowns you see most often in high-level BJJ competition.
The first thing to know is that there are TONS of different throws and takedowns in Grappling.
In the original Judo syllabus, for example, there were 67 different throws you had to learn. But if you include all the major variations of those 67 throws then you’d be well into the hundreds before you were done.
And then if you add the throws and takedowns from Freestyle Wrestling, Greco-Roman Wrestling, and Sambo it gets ridiculous: probably a thousand techniques or more.
But it’s actually a lot simpler than that.  You DON’T have to learn a thousand throws to become a competent grappler.
You don’t even have to learn all 10 techniques mentioned on this page – in fact that would be both inefficient and ineffective.
Consider Judo…  Most top Judo players only have two to four reliable throwing techniques – that’s it!  They specialise in a small number of throws that most suit their body type, personality, and fighting style.
What those throws are might vary from player to player, but there’s nobody out there hitting 50 different throws in the Olympics.  Nobody.
Almost all of a high-level Judoka’s training is geared towards honing the mechanics for whatever limited number of throws they use, working on the setups for them, and getting thousands of thousands of repetitions.
If knowing more throws was the most effective way to win matches don’t you think that that both Wrestlers and Judoka would have figured this out already?
The groundwork in BJJ is so important that we have even less time to train standup.  So for us the key is to get one or two throws to work for reliably for you, and then you’re off to the races.
Here are the 10 throws and takedowns you see most often in high-level BJJ competition.